doc/notes.md, before:

# etlog - eduroam trafic log analysis

## Basic info

etlog can be accessed on [etlog.cesnet.cz](https://etlog.cesnet.cz). It gathers and analyzes national radius log files
generated by [eduroam](http://eduroam.cz) service and presents them to the users.
etlog is intended for both users and administrators.

some of the main reasons to create etlog were:
- create generic interface for processing, analysis and searching of the radius log files
- create a system for generating statistics and reports
- create a system for trend analysis, which can signal service problems
- create a system for anomaly detection (authnetication errors, device or identity theft, .. )

etlog consists of Node.js, Express web application framework and MongoDB.

## Server setup

The application is setup on Debian jessie. It is running as user etlog and it's root is in /home/etlog/etlog/.
It is listening for incoming connections on port 8080 for http connections and 
on port 8443 for https connections. Http Connection are automatically redirected to https.
Successful redicretion requires HTTP 1.1 host header.

### Network setup

Automatic port redirection to ports 8080 and 8443 is provided through iptables:
Persistence of rules is ensured by iptables-persistent debian package:
```
apt-get install iptables-persistent
iptables -t nat -A PREROUTING -i eth0 -p tcp --dport 80  -j REDIRECT --to-port 8080
iptables -t nat -A PREROUTING -i eth0 -p tcp --dport 443 -j REDIRECT --to-port 8443
iptables-save > /etc/iptables/rules.v4
ip6tables -t nat -A PREROUTING -i eth0 -p tcp -d 2001:718:1:1f:50:56ff:feee:150/64 --dport 80  -j REDIRECT --to-port 8080
ip6tables -t nat -A PREROUTING -i eth0 -p tcp -d 2001:718:1:1f:50:56ff:feee:150/64 --dport 443 -j REDIRECT --to-port 8443
ip6tables-save > /etc/iptables/rules.v6
```

### Syslog setup

Radius data are acquired through syslog. Installation and configuration:

```
cd /etc/ssl/certs/
wget https://crt.cesnet-ca.cz/CESNET_CA_Root.pem
wget https://crt.cesnet-ca.cz/CESNET_CA_3.pem
c_rehash
apt-get install syslog-ng
cat > /etc/syslog-ng/conf.d/etlog-fticks.conf
source net {
  tcp(
    port(1999)
    tls( ca_dir("/etc/ssl/certs")
    key-file("/home/etlog/etlog/cert/etlog.cesnet.cz.key.pem")
    cert-file("/home/etlog/etlog/cert/etlog.cesnet.cz.crt.pem"))
  );
};

destination fticks { file("/home/etlog/logs/fticks/fticks-$YEAR-$MONTH-$DAY" owner("etlog") group("etlog") perm(0600)); };

log { source(net); destination(fticks); };
^D
service syslog-ng restart

su - etlog
mkdir -p ~/logs/{fticks,transform,mongo}
```

### Cron setup

Cron is used to run tasks periodically.
Setup is done in application for application logic and in user's
crontab for incoming log importing.

#### System

User's crontab can be edited by using `crontab -e`.
Script for data importing may be run every 5 minutes by adding code below.
```
*/5 *  *   *   *     /home/etlog/etlog/scripts/cron.sh
```

#### Node.js

Setup is defined in cron.js.
Table below defined how tasks are run.
Every task generates data for collection of the same name.

| task name        |              interval            |
|------------------|----------------------------------|
| failed\_logins   |      every day at 02:05:00       |
| invalid\_records |      every day at 02:10:00       |
| mac\_count       |      every day at 02:15:00       |
| roaming          |      every day at 02:20:00       |


### Mail setup

Mail is handled by postfix mail server. 
Postfix configuration type is set up as Internet site.
Listeting only on localhost address is done with 
`inet_interfaces = 127.0.0.1` in /etc/postfix/main.cf


#### Node.js

TODO

### Packages

These packages are necessary for etlog to run:

openssl
git
tmux
htop
iptables-persistent
curl
tmux
make
syslog-ng
gawk
logtail
postfix
mailutils

Other special packages along with installation are listed below.
  
  
### MongoDB

#### installation

At the time of writing this guide, no official documentation for installation on Debian jessie
is available.

```
apt-key adv --keyserver hkp://keyserver.ubuntu.com:80 --recv EA312927
echo "deb http://repo.mongodb.org/apt/debian jessie/mongodb-org/3.2 main" | tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/mongodb-org-3.2.list
apt-get install mongodb-org
systemctl enable mongod
service mongod start
```

#### Configuration

Disable THP by following guide from official [docs](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/tutorial/transparent-huge-pages/).
No further configuration should be needed.


#### Time data

MongoDB stores all time data as Date data type, which stores time in UTC.
This present issue when incoming data have localtime which has offset against UTC
Official MongoDB [docs](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/tutorial/model-time-data/) say that:
> MongoDB stores times in UTC by default, and will convert any local time representations into this form. Applications that must operate or report on some unmodified local time value may store the time zone alongside the UTC timestamp, and compute the original local time in their application logic.

Data will be reconstructed to original time when presenting to the user.

TODO
Should the apllication use momentjs for conversion to local timezone?

possible help:
http://stackoverflow.com/questions/18287493/how-to-deal-with-the-timezone-issue-when-storing-dates-in-utc-using-mongod
http://stackoverflow.com/questions/31353740/aggregating-in-local-timezone-in-mongodb
http://stackoverflow.com/questions/18852095/how-to-agregate-by-year-month-day-on-a-different-timezone
https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/tutorial/model-time-data/

#### Usage

Database can be accessed by command `mongo`. MongoDB is document oriented database. 
Data are divided into databases, same as in the sql dabases. Each database consists of collections,
which is equivalent of sql tables. Collections consist of documents, which use the BSON notation, which is basen on JSON.

Basic commands:

`show databases` lists all databases which are available.

`use my_database` swich current database to my\_database

`show collections` lists collection for current database.

`db.my_collection.find({})` display all documents in my\_collection

`db.my_collection.find({}).limit(5)` display 5 document from my\_collection

`db.my_collection.find({})limit(5).pretty()` display 5 nicely formatted documents from my\_collection


### Node.js

Node.js is server-side JavaScript.
Because the version of Node.js available in Debian jessie is very old (0.10.29~dfsg-2),
installation of newer version is needed. 
At the time of writing this guide current version of Node.js is 6.5.

### installation

```
apt-get install curl
curl -sL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_6.x | bash -
apt-get install nodejs
```


## Application internals

etlog consists of Node.js, Express web application framework and MongoDB.
It uses many auxiliary javascript modules.
All the necesarry modules including their specific version can be found in file **package.json**.

### Database

Application uses database etlog.
Database is separated into several collections.

#### Collections

In the tables below the column note is just explanatory, it is not really present in the database.
Every document has also a field _id, which is just for internal MongoDB purposes, it is not shown in tables below.

##### logs

Collection represents raw radius log records transformed to json format. 
For details on data transformation see scripts/fticks\_to\_json.sh

| field name | data type |               note               |
|------------|-----------|----------------------------------|
| timestamp  |   Date    |      timestamp of authentication |
| realm      |   String  |      domain part of username     |
| viscountry |   String  |      visited country             |
| visinst    |   String  |      visited institution         |
| csi        |   String  |      mac address                 |
| pn         |   String  |      username                    |
| result     |   String  |      result of authentication    |

##### users\_mac

Collection defines binding between user and all mac addresses, which he used for successfull authentication to eduroam.


| field name | data type |               note                  |
|------------|-----------|-------------------------------------|
| username   |   String  |      username                       |
| addrs      |   Array   |      array of user's mac addresses  |


##### privileged\_ips

Collection containing privileged ip addresses, which will bypass
saml authentication. Address authentication is done using module passport-ip.
Addresses must be in commonly used slash format:

ipv4 addresses format:

```
'192.168.1.1/32'
'10.0.0.0/8'
```

ipv6 addresses format:

```
'2001:718:2:1::1/128'
'2001:718:2:1::/64'
```

| field name | data type |               note               |
|------------|-----------|----------------------------------|
| ip         |   String  |  string representing ip address  |


###### data insertion/update

After data update, the application must be restarted.
Privileged ip addresses are loaded only on application startup.
Localhost address is added for cron tasks to use application api.
Data can be inserted by accesing mongo shell and using commands:

```
use etlog
db.privileged_ips.insert({ip : '127.0.0.1/32'})
db.privileged_ips.insert({ip : '192.168.1.1/32'})
```


##### invalid\_records

Timestamp field is populated with artificial data, just to
distint in which interval the record belongs.
Lowest distinction interval for timestamp is 24 hours.


| field name | data type |               note                  |
|------------|-----------|-------------------------------------|
| timestamp  |   Date    |         timestamp                   |
| records    |   Array   |         array of invalid records    |


##### mac\_count

Timestamp field is populated with artificial data, just to
distint in which interval the record belongs.
Lowest distinction interval for timestamp is 24 hours.


| field name | data type |               note                  |
|------------|-----------|-------------------------------------|
| username   |   String  |         username                    |
| count      |   Number  |         mac addresses count         |
| addrs      |   Array   |         Array of mac addresses      |
| timestamp  |   Date    |         timestamp                   |


##### roaming

Timestamp field is populated with artificial data, just to
distint in which interval the record belongs.
Lowest distinction interval for timestamp is 24 hours.


| field name       | data type |               note                          |
|------------------|-----------|---------------------------------------------|
| inst\_name       |   String  | name of the institution                     |
| used\_count      |   Number  | count of institution's users authenticated  |
| provided\_count  |   Number  | count of authentications provided           |
| timestamp        |   Date    | timestamp                                   |


##### failed\_logins

Timestamp field is populated with artificial data, just to
distint in which interval the record belongs.
Lowest distinction interval for timestamp is 24 hours.

| field name   | data type |               note                  |
|--------------|-----------|-------------------------------------|
| username     |   String  |         username                    |
| timestamp    |   Date    |         timestamp                   |
| fail\_count  |   Number  |    count of failed login attempts   |
| ok\_count    |   Number  |  count of successful login attempts |
| ratio        |   Number  |  ratio of fail\_count to (ok\_count + fail\_count) |

##### stats

TODO

| field name | data type |               note                  |
|------------|-----------|-------------------------------------|
| timestamp  |   Date    |         timestamp                   |


### Application structure

```
  /home/etlog/etlog          - application root
  |-- app.js                 - main application file, constains appliation configuration
  |-- auth.js                - authentication configuration
  |-- bin                   
      `-- www                - script to start the application
  |-- cert                   - certificate related files
  |-- cron                   - cron tasks
      `-- failed_logins.js   - cron task for generating failed_logins collection data
      `-- invalid_records.js - cron task for generating invalid_records collection data
      `-- mac_count.js       - cron task for generating mac_count collection data
      `-- roaming.js         - cron task for generating roaming collection data
      `-- users_to_mac.js    - cron task for mapping users and mac addresses
  |-- db.js                  - database and schema configuration
  |-- cron.js                - cron tasks definiton
  |-- doc                    - documentation
  |-- node\_modules          - application dependency files
  |-- package.json           - definition of application dependencies and properties
  |-- public                 - directory for referring public files
  |-- README.md              - link to doc/notes.md
  |-- routes                 - application routes
  |-- routes.js              - mapping of routes to application
  |-- scripts                - various scripts
      `-- fticks_to_json.sh  - transformation script from fticks to json
      `-- cron.sh            - cron script to import live data delivered by syslog
  |-- views                  - templates of displayed pages
```


### Log files 

TODO

### API

TODO


### Routes

#### frontend

TODO

#### backend

TODO


======================================================================================
transformace dat:

  string "timestamp" na datovy typ Date:
  importovana data transformujeme az v databazi
  pro spravny cas v datovem typu je treba nastavit systemovy cas na UTC! 
  (v opacnem pripade jsou transformovana data posunuta o offset odpovidajici casovemu pasmu)
  > use fticks
  > db.logy.find({}).forEach(function(el){ el.timestamp = new Date(el.timestamp + " 2014"); db.logy.save(el); });
  trvani pro jeden mesic dat zhruba 4 hodiny, 28 minut


======================================================================================
podle nalezenych informaci se aktualne tento typ aplikaci (web + mongodb)
nejcasteji realizuje pomoci nekolika modulu samotneho nodejs (vse psano v javascriptu)

konkretni architektura reseni je zhruba nasledujici:
(v obecnem pripade se muze jednat pouze o jine moduly, pripadne muzou byt doplneny ruzne koncepty - proxy, loadbalancing, ..)
  - webovy server je realizovan pomoci modulu express, ten zaroven resi routing mezi zdroji (url)
  - komunikace smerem od klienta (browseru) probiha pomoci REST api
  - interakci s databazi resi modul mongoose, umoznuje definovani "schematu" konkretni kolekce, tim nabizi logiku vyssi urovne pro konkretni operace


vice viz schema (/root/doc/schema)  TODO


======================================================================================
pro vytvoreni vlastni kostry webove aplikace je dale nutne:
  npm install -g express-generator
  npm install -g express

nasledne vytvoreni kostry aplikace provedeme pomoci:
  express testovaci_aplikace


======================================================================================

Commit message:

update mail setup info and repo structure

doc/notes.md, after:

# etlog - eduroam trafic log analysis

## Basic info

etlog can be accessed on [etlog.cesnet.cz](https://etlog.cesnet.cz). It gathers and analyzes national radius log files
generated by [eduroam](http://eduroam.cz) service and presents them to the users.
etlog is intended for both users and administrators.

some of the main reasons to create etlog were:
- create generic interface for processing, analysis and searching of the radius log files
- create a system for generating statistics and reports
- create a system for trend analysis, which can signal service problems
- create a system for anomaly detection (authnetication errors, device or identity theft, .. )

etlog consists of Node.js, Express web application framework and MongoDB.

## Server setup

The application is setup on Debian jessie. It is running as user etlog and it's root is in /home/etlog/etlog/.
It is listening for incoming connections on port 8080 for http connections and 
on port 8443 for https connections. Http Connection are automatically redirected to https.
Successful redicretion requires HTTP 1.1 host header.

### Network setup

Automatic port redirection to ports 8080 and 8443 is provided through iptables:
Persistence of rules is ensured by iptables-persistent debian package:
```
apt-get install iptables-persistent
iptables -t nat -A PREROUTING -i eth0 -p tcp --dport 80  -j REDIRECT --to-port 8080
iptables -t nat -A PREROUTING -i eth0 -p tcp --dport 443 -j REDIRECT --to-port 8443
iptables-save > /etc/iptables/rules.v4
ip6tables -t nat -A PREROUTING -i eth0 -p tcp -d 2001:718:1:1f:50:56ff:feee:150/64 --dport 80  -j REDIRECT --to-port 8080
ip6tables -t nat -A PREROUTING -i eth0 -p tcp -d 2001:718:1:1f:50:56ff:feee:150/64 --dport 443 -j REDIRECT --to-port 8443
ip6tables-save > /etc/iptables/rules.v6
```

### Syslog setup

Radius data are acquired through syslog. Installation and configuration:

```
cd /etc/ssl/certs/
wget https://crt.cesnet-ca.cz/CESNET_CA_Root.pem
wget https://crt.cesnet-ca.cz/CESNET_CA_3.pem
c_rehash
apt-get install syslog-ng
cat > /etc/syslog-ng/conf.d/etlog-fticks.conf
source net {
  tcp(
    port(1999)
    tls( ca_dir("/etc/ssl/certs")
    key-file("/home/etlog/etlog/cert/etlog.cesnet.cz.key.pem")
    cert-file("/home/etlog/etlog/cert/etlog.cesnet.cz.crt.pem"))
  );
};

destination fticks { file("/home/etlog/logs/fticks/fticks-$YEAR-$MONTH-$DAY" owner("etlog") group("etlog") perm(0600)); };

log { source(net); destination(fticks); };
^D
service syslog-ng restart

su - etlog
mkdir -p ~/logs/{fticks,transform,mongo}
```

### Cron setup

Cron is used to run tasks periodically.
Setup is done in application for application logic and in user's
crontab for incoming log importing.

#### System

User's crontab can be edited by using `crontab -e`.
Script for data importing may be run every 5 minutes by adding code below.
```
*/5 *  *   *   *     /home/etlog/etlog/scripts/cron.sh
```

#### Node.js

Setup is defined in cron.js.
Table below defined how tasks are run.
Every task generates data for collection of the same name.

| task name        |              interval            |
|------------------|----------------------------------|
| failed\_logins   |      every day at 02:05:00       |
| invalid\_records |      every day at 02:10:00       |
| mac\_count       |      every day at 02:15:00       |
| roaming          |      every day at 02:20:00       |


### Mail setup

Mail is handled by postfix mail server. 
Postfix configuration type is set up as Internet site.
Listeting only on localhost address is done with 
`inet_interfaces = 127.0.0.1` in /etc/postfix/main.cf


#### Node.js

Setup is done with nodemailer package in mail.js in repository root.


### Packages

These packages are necessary for etlog to run:

openssl
git
tmux
htop
iptables-persistent
curl
tmux
make
syslog-ng
gawk
logtail
postfix
mailutils

Other special packages along with installation are listed below.
  
  
### MongoDB

#### installation

At the time of writing this guide, no official documentation for installation on Debian jessie
is available.

```
apt-key adv --keyserver hkp://keyserver.ubuntu.com:80 --recv EA312927
echo "deb http://repo.mongodb.org/apt/debian jessie/mongodb-org/3.2 main" | tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/mongodb-org-3.2.list
apt-get install mongodb-org
systemctl enable mongod
service mongod start
```

#### Configuration

Disable THP by following guide from official [docs](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/tutorial/transparent-huge-pages/).
No further configuration should be needed.


#### Time data

MongoDB stores all time data as Date data type, which stores time in UTC.
This present issue when incoming data have localtime which has offset against UTC
Official MongoDB [docs](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/tutorial/model-time-data/) say that:
> MongoDB stores times in UTC by default, and will convert any local time representations into this form. Applications that must operate or report on some unmodified local time value may store the time zone alongside the UTC timestamp, and compute the original local time in their application logic.

Data will be reconstructed to original time when presenting to the user.

TODO
Should the apllication use momentjs for conversion to local timezone?

possible help:
http://stackoverflow.com/questions/18287493/how-to-deal-with-the-timezone-issue-when-storing-dates-in-utc-using-mongod
http://stackoverflow.com/questions/31353740/aggregating-in-local-timezone-in-mongodb
http://stackoverflow.com/questions/18852095/how-to-agregate-by-year-month-day-on-a-different-timezone
https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/tutorial/model-time-data/

#### Usage

Database can be accessed by command `mongo`. MongoDB is document oriented database. 
Data are divided into databases, same as in the sql dabases. Each database consists of collections,
which is equivalent of sql tables. Collections consist of documents, which use the BSON notation, which is basen on JSON.

Basic commands:

`show databases` lists all databases which are available.

`use my_database` swich current database to my\_database

`show collections` lists collection for current database.

`db.my_collection.find({})` display all documents in my\_collection

`db.my_collection.find({}).limit(5)` display 5 document from my\_collection

`db.my_collection.find({})limit(5).pretty()` display 5 nicely formatted documents from my\_collection


### Node.js

Node.js is server-side JavaScript.
Because the version of Node.js available in Debian jessie is very old (0.10.29~dfsg-2),
installation of newer version is needed. 
At the time of writing this guide current version of Node.js is 6.5.

### installation

```
apt-get install curl
curl -sL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_6.x | bash -
apt-get install nodejs
```


## Application internals

etlog consists of Node.js, Express web application framework and MongoDB.
It uses many auxiliary javascript modules.
All the necesarry modules including their specific version can be found in file **package.json**.

### Database

Application uses database etlog.
Database is separated into several collections.

#### Collections

In the tables below the column note is just explanatory, it is not really present in the database.
Every document has also a field _id, which is just for internal MongoDB purposes, it is not shown in tables below.

##### logs

Collection represents raw radius log records transformed to json format. 
For details on data transformation see scripts/fticks\_to\_json.sh

| field name | data type |               note               |
|------------|-----------|----------------------------------|
| timestamp  |   Date    |      timestamp of authentication |
| realm      |   String  |      domain part of username     |
| viscountry |   String  |      visited country             |
| visinst    |   String  |      visited institution         |
| csi        |   String  |      mac address                 |
| pn         |   String  |      username                    |
| result     |   String  |      result of authentication    |

##### users\_mac

Collection defines binding between user and all mac addresses, which he used for successfull authentication to eduroam.


| field name | data type |               note                  |
|------------|-----------|-------------------------------------|
| username   |   String  |      username                       |
| addrs      |   Array   |      array of user's mac addresses  |


##### privileged\_ips

Collection containing privileged ip addresses, which will bypass
saml authentication. Address authentication is done using module passport-ip.
Addresses must be in commonly used slash format:

ipv4 addresses format:

```
'192.168.1.1/32'
'10.0.0.0/8'
```

ipv6 addresses format:

```
'2001:718:2:1::1/128'
'2001:718:2:1::/64'
```

| field name | data type |               note               |
|------------|-----------|----------------------------------|
| ip         |   String  |  string representing ip address  |


###### data insertion/update

After data update, the application must be restarted.
Privileged ip addresses are loaded only on application startup.
Localhost address is added for cron tasks to use application api.
Data can be inserted by accesing mongo shell and using commands:

```
use etlog
db.privileged_ips.insert({ip : '127.0.0.1/32'})
db.privileged_ips.insert({ip : '192.168.1.1/32'})
```


##### invalid\_records

Timestamp field is populated with artificial data, just to
distint in which interval the record belongs.
Lowest distinction interval for timestamp is 24 hours.


| field name | data type |               note                  |
|------------|-----------|-------------------------------------|
| timestamp  |   Date    |         timestamp                   |
| records    |   Array   |         array of invalid records    |


##### mac\_count

Timestamp field is populated with artificial data, just to
distint in which interval the record belongs.
Lowest distinction interval for timestamp is 24 hours.


| field name | data type |               note                  |
|------------|-----------|-------------------------------------|
| username   |   String  |         username                    |
| count      |   Number  |         mac addresses count         |
| addrs      |   Array   |         Array of mac addresses      |
| timestamp  |   Date    |         timestamp                   |


##### roaming

Timestamp field is populated with artificial data, just to
distint in which interval the record belongs.
Lowest distinction interval for timestamp is 24 hours.


| field name       | data type |               note                          |
|------------------|-----------|---------------------------------------------|
| inst\_name       |   String  | name of the institution                     |
| used\_count      |   Number  | count of institution's users authenticated  |
| provided\_count  |   Number  | count of authentications provided           |
| timestamp        |   Date    | timestamp                                   |


##### failed\_logins

Timestamp field is populated with artificial data, just to
distint in which interval the record belongs.
Lowest distinction interval for timestamp is 24 hours.

| field name   | data type |               note                  |
|--------------|-----------|-------------------------------------|
| username     |   String  |         username                    |
| timestamp    |   Date    |         timestamp                   |
| fail\_count  |   Number  |    count of failed login attempts   |
| ok\_count    |   Number  |  count of successful login attempts |
| ratio        |   Number  |  ratio of fail\_count to (ok\_count + fail\_count) |

##### stats

TODO

| field name | data type |               note                  |
|------------|-----------|-------------------------------------|
| timestamp  |   Date    |         timestamp                   |


### Application structure

```
  /home/etlog/etlog          - application root
  |-- app.js                 - main application file, constains appliation configuration
  |-- auth.js                - authentication configuration
  |-- bin                   
      `-- www                - script to start the application
  |-- cert                   - certificate related files
  |-- cron                   - cron tasks
      `-- failed_logins.js   - cron task for generating failed_logins collection data
      `-- invalid_records.js - cron task for generating invalid_records collection data
      `-- mac_count.js       - cron task for generating mac_count collection data
      `-- roaming.js         - cron task for generating roaming collection data
      `-- users_to_mac.js    - cron task for mapping users and mac addresses
  |-- db.js                  - database and schema configuration
  |-- cron.js                - cron tasks definiton
  |-- doc                    - documentation
  |-- mail.js                - mail setup
  |-- node\_modules          - application dependency files
  |-- package.json           - definition of application dependencies and properties
  |-- public                 - directory for referring public files
  |-- README.md              - link to doc/notes.md
  |-- routes                 - application routes
  |-- routes.js              - mapping of routes to application
  |-- scripts                - various scripts
      `-- fticks_to_json.sh  - transformation script from fticks to json
      `-- cron.sh            - cron script to import live data delivered by syslog
  |-- views                  - templates of displayed pages
```


### Log files 

TODO

### API

TODO


### Routes

#### frontend

TODO

#### backend

TODO


======================================================================================
transformace dat:

  string "timestamp" na datovy typ Date:
  importovana data transformujeme az v databazi
  pro spravny cas v datovem typu je treba nastavit systemovy cas na UTC! 
  (v opacnem pripade jsou transformovana data posunuta o offset odpovidajici casovemu pasmu)
  > use fticks
  > db.logy.find({}).forEach(function(el){ el.timestamp = new Date(el.timestamp + " 2014"); db.logy.save(el); });
  trvani pro jeden mesic dat zhruba 4 hodiny, 28 minut


======================================================================================
podle nalezenych informaci se aktualne tento typ aplikaci (web + mongodb)
nejcasteji realizuje pomoci nekolika modulu samotneho nodejs (vse psano v javascriptu)

konkretni architektura reseni je zhruba nasledujici:
(v obecnem pripade se muze jednat pouze o jine moduly, pripadne muzou byt doplneny ruzne koncepty - proxy, loadbalancing, ..)
  - webovy server je realizovan pomoci modulu express, ten zaroven resi routing mezi zdroji (url)
  - komunikace smerem od klienta (browseru) probiha pomoci REST api
  - interakci s databazi resi modul mongoose, umoznuje definovani "schematu" konkretni kolekce, tim nabizi logiku vyssi urovne pro konkretni operace


vice viz schema (/root/doc/schema)  TODO


======================================================================================
pro vytvoreni vlastni kostry webove aplikace je dale nutne:
  npm install -g express-generator
  npm install -g express

nasledne vytvoreni kostry aplikace provedeme pomoci:
  express testovaci_aplikace


======================================================================================
